---
layout: post
date: 2014-3-20
title: "Badiou and Why Animal Rights Don't Matter"
excerpt: ''

---

An everyday, ordinary ethical question that we, as lucky members of
modernity (or, if you'd like, post-modernity), are allowed to ask is:
"What are we entitled to under a (the) universal decleration of human
rights?" This question is, Badiou points out, is of course a
questioning belonging to an understanding of Western ideology, which
is, we think, the so called democratic materialism. This is a pretty
good name for the ethical axioms that we have to put up with on a
daily basis: "stay safe; have fun", and "as long as it doesn't bother
anyone else..." The first points to our strange quasi-hedonism and the
later to our 'tolerance' of the other (ironically resulting in, as
many others have pointed out, the ultimate othering of the other).

So, I take it that the rights procured by the universal decloration of
human rights are the very same as those of the prevailing
ideology. They are the rights of the living. But we know from our own
lives, from our favorite everyday mantras, that the 'right to live'
only means the right to stay safe and have fun, to tolerate the
other. A pretty useless existence, if you ask me. But I'd be lying if
I said this was a genuine thought, if such a thing is even possible,
as Badiou beat me to the punch: "'Human rights' are one and the same
thing as the rights of the living. The rights of the living being to
remain a desolate individual aspiring to enjoyment." When we
understand ourselves as merely living (material) being, we get a
merely material understanding of human rights. This is just a logical
extenstion, an application of the syollogism,We only need valid (not
sound) reaso

we only need valid (not
sound) arguing to see that such an existence is the logical extenstio

It seems to me that this is simply the logical exntestion
of the self understood as solely (merely) as living being.

This, of course, is why animal rights seem so undeniable. Insofar as
we understand ourselves only as bodies + language, normativity is
similarly limited to these two spheres. Animals are bodies and
demonstrate symbolic forms of communication, and so are entitled to at
least some peice of these rights of the living.

Badiou explicates the same point:
<blockquote>
In order to validate the equation existence = individual = body,
contemporary doxa must courageously absorb humanity into a positive
vision of animality. 'Human rights' are one and the same thing as the
rights of the living. The rights of the living being to remain a
desolate individual aspiring to enjoyment. Mortal bodies. Suffering
lives. The humanist protection of all the animals, humans included:
such is the norm of contemporary materialism.
</blockquote>

Normativity, as we know, exists only in this limited sense today: as
the garuanteerer of the pluarality of language. It is Leyotard
codified into law. No language, game or othwerwise, is allowed to
subjigate any other. Badiou notes an important exception: "A language
that claims to regulate all the others, to rule all bodies, will be
called dictatorial and totalitarian" and so it is to be put in it's
place through an act of violence. This is the essence of the West's
political violence: actions that "serve to rectify the universalistic
claims, as well as the lingustic sectarianism."

Let us put aside the obvious problem of a universalistic claim that
asserts the injustice of a universalistic claim. "No Democracy for the
enimies of democracy"

<blockquote>
This is why, in democratic materialism, sexual freedom is
the paradigm of every freedom. It is in effect clearly placed at the
point of articulation of desires (bodies) and linguistic, prohibitive
or stimulating legislations. The individual must see recognized its
right to 'live his or her sexuality'. The other freedoms will
necessarily follow. And it is true that they follow, if we understand
every freedom from the point of view of the model it adopts with
regard to sex: the non-prohibition of the uses that an individual can
make, in private, of the body that inscribes it in the world.
</blockquote>

This is what I mean when I say "sociology, well within ideology."

<blockquote>
'Life' - and its tributaries ('forms of life', 'constituent life',
'the art of life', and so on) - a major signifier of democratic
materialism. At the level of pure opinion 'to have a successful life'
is the only imperative that is today understood by everyone. That is
because 'life' designates every empirical correlation between bodies
and language. And the norm of life is, all too naturally, that the
genealogy of languages be adequate to the power of bodies.
</blockquote>
