---
layout: post
title: 'Reading the Gadamer/Derrida Encounter In _Letter on Humanism_'
date:  2014-06-29

---

![dialouge and deconstruction]({{ site.url }}/images/gadamer.jpg)

Here Heidigeer thinks through humanisms. (written in response to existentialism is a humanism)

When thinking comes to an end by slipping out of its element it
replaces this loss by procuring a validity for itself as _techne_, as
an instrument of education and therefore as a classroom matter and
later a cultural concern. By and by philosophy becomes a technique for
explaining from highest causes. One no longer things; one occupies
oneself with "philosophy". In competition with one another, such
occupations publicly offer themselves as "-isms" and try to offer more
than the others. The dominance of such terms is not accidental. It
rests above all in the modern age upon the peculiar dictatorship of
the public realm. However, so-called "private existence" is not really
essential, that is to say free, human being. It simply insists on
negating the public realm. It remains an offshoot that depends upon
the public and nourishes itself by a mere withdrawal from it. Hence it
testifies, against its own will, to its subservience to the public
realm. But because it stems from the dominance of subjectivity the
public realm itself is the metaphysically conditioned establishment
and authorization of the openness of individual beings in their
unconditional objectification. Language thereby falls into the service
of expediting communication along routes where objectification---the
uniform accessibility of everything to everyone---branches out and
disregards all limits. In this way language comes under the
dictatorship of the public realm, which decides in advance what is
intelligible and what must be rejected as unintelligible. What is said
in _Being and Time_ (1927), sections 27 and 35, about the "they" in no
way means to furnish an incidental contribution to sociology. Just as
little does the "they" mean merely the opposite, understood in an
ehtical-existentiell way, of the selfhood of persons. Rather, what is
said there contains a reference, thought in terms of the question of
the truth of Being, to the word's primordial belongingness to
Being. This relation remains concealed beneath the dominance of
subjectivity that presents itself as the public realm. But if the
truth of Being has become thought-provoking for thinking, then
reflection on the essence of language must also attain a different
rank. It can no longer be a mere philosophy of language. That is the
only reason _Being and Time_ (section 34) contains a reference to the
essential dimension of language and touches upon the simple question
as to what mode of Being lanuguage
