---
layout: post
date: 2014-3-20
title: 'Zizek via Lacan on Displaced Belief'

---

What many readers of Lacan fail to notice is how the figure of the
subject supposed to know [the analyist] is a secondary phenomenon, an
exception, something that emerges against the more fundamental
background of the _subject supposed to believe_ [the analysand], which
is the constitutive feature of the symbolic order. According to a
well-known anthropological anecdote, the primitives to whom certain
supersititious beliefs were attributed (that they descended from a
fish or from a bird, for example), when directly asked about these
beliefs, answered: 'Of course not --- I'm not that stupid. But I have
been told that some of our ancestors actually did believe that...' In
short, they transferred their belief onto another. Are we not doing
the same with our children? We go through the ritual of Santa Claus,
since our children (are supposed to) believe in it and we do not want
to disappoint them; they pretend to believe so as not to disapoint us
and our belief in their naivety (and to get presents, of course). Is
not this need to find another who 'really belives' also that which
propels us in our need to stigmatize the other as a religious or
ethnic fundamentalist? In an uncanny way some beliefs always seem to
function at a distance: in order for the belief to function, there has
to be some ultimate guarantor of it, some true believer, yet this
guarantor is always deferred, displaced, never present in person. How,
then, is belief possible? How is this vicious cycle of deferred belief
cut short? The point, of course, is that, for the belief to be
operative, the subject who directly believes need not exist at all:it
is enough precisely to presuppose his existence, to believe in it,
either in the guise of the mythological founding figure who is not
part of our reality, or in the guise of the impersonal actor, the
unspecified agent --- 'They say that ...'/'It is said that...'

This, at least, seems to be the predominant status of beliefs today,
in our era that claims for itself the title 'post-ideological'. Niels
Bohr, who had aptly replied to Einstein's 'God doesn't place dice'
('Don't tell God what to do!'), also provided the perfect example of
how a fetishit disavowal of belief works in ideology. Seeing a
horseshoe on Bohr's door, a surprised visitor remarked that he didn't
believe in the superstition that it brought luck. Bohr snapped back:
'I Don't believe in it either; I have it there because I was told that
it also works if one does not believe in it!' Perhaps this is why
'culture' is emerging as the central life-world category. With regard
to religion, we no longer 'really believe', we just follow (various)
religious rituals and behaviours as part of a respect for the
'life-style' of the community we belong to (non-believing Jews may
obey kosher rules 'out of respect for traidtion'). 'I do not really
believe in it, it is just part of my cultre' seems to be the
predominant mode of the displaced belief,
